Dr. Alex Higgins.
It's January 19, 1994.
Where do we start?
I guess I began by reading your essay, My Liberal Education, and I pulled out a few quotes that were very revealing to me.
I guess one thing you point out is that you've gone through life and through your experiences by always keeping an open mind about everything.
You've always tried to keep an open mind.
You described the meeting with the young man who interviewed you for The Scarlet, for instance, and Esther Goddard had said she wondered if she needed a lawyer during the interview.
It's a wonderful story.
But then you told her, don't worry about it.
You'll have a nice time.
And she kept an open mind.
You had an open mind with the Black Student Union.
You kept an open mind about working on these various committees that you initially didn't want to work on.
I wonder if perhaps this has been kind of a philosophy that has guided you three through your life.
Thank you.
We'll just start with that.
How's that?
We'll just outporn it.
Is it running now?
It's running, yes.
You can talk, and you don't have to sit close.
You can pick it up.
I think it evolved.
When I first was asked if I would be a trustee of Clark, I was actually overwhelmed with the idea and wondering what I could contribute and what it involved.
I really had no idea what it involved because what it evolved into was a full-time job.
But I suppose, perhaps, would you like sugar and cream?
What it evolved into... In the first place I thought, how am I ever going to talk to those eggheads?
I was quite in awe of them.
And it evolved, but I found that they were always remarkably, I think, receptive of a woman on the board.
And I really don't know why, because one trustee resigned rather than a woman on the board of trustees.
old line with your family.
Kind of comical, well, in misrespect, isn't it?
Yes.
It is, because I think it was Henshaw-Dewick, and his sons are not at all as almost reactionary as he was.
And I think I was a little afraid of students.
I didn't know how I was going to talk with them.
So I began to feel my way along, and the more I talked with both faculty and students, the more I found that I could just enjoy them, that I was interested in what they had to say, and that there were things one needed to develop in one's own way of
I hate the word dealing with people because it always sounds like wheeling and dealing to me, but it relates to other people.
That could be developed to my advantage as well as theirs.
And I think that's where my philosophy began at the end, actually, when I became just people.
Okay.
You said also, the last time we spoke here, that I guess the driving ambition of your life is to be published.
Yes.
And you said, you said, I'm a frustrated writer.
How do you suppose that is, or why do you suppose that is?
I wrote when I was a child.
poetry and stories.
And my father was, I think, quite proud of that.
And he was always waving my flag.
And it became
It was quite clear to me early on that I wasn't anything like what my father thought I was and what he thought I was going to turn into.
What do you think he thought you were going to turn into?
He thought I might turn into a writer.
He was a very curious man.
There's a lot of people on him.
And I don't think it's something that we want to go into right now.
But he was ambitious.
He was talented and he was very threatened.
So I think that he thought he was going to develop through his children.
I had one younger sister.
A lot of the things that he had not achieved.
No brothers.
No brothers?
No, no, no brothers.
I don't know, are you a New England girl?
Are you from?
Middle West.
I was born in Chicago and brought up in Lake Forest.
And then we moved to New York when I was 18 years old.
My father's business changed.
So you really, you didn't know, not to jump around, but you didn't know your husband at all from childhood?
No.
I think you said that you both went to Milton Academy, but I guess that was just coincidental.
Yes, that was a big turning point in my life, going to Northern Academy.
And I've just written something about that, that they won't believe on my magazine.
Turning point educationally, or spiritually, or a combination of everything?
A combination of everything.
I think I grew up there.
I was born to a great privilege.
And Gerald, in the Middle West, did not go to college enough in those days.
I didn't know anybody that went to college.
And I didn't have any ambitions to go to college.
I just hoped that I was... One thing I wanted to do was to be married, and I had children.
And that, I thought, was... I wanted to make a suitable background for a clever husband.
That's what I had in mind.
As much as I had anything, I think.
By happenstance, I went to Milton Academy, and I think I grew up there.
I got excited about learning.
I got excited about literature.
I got excited about a lot of things.
Oh, wonderful.
And I decided to go to college.
Oh, you did.
Which I did.
I went to Vassar for a year, but I didn't like it at all.
And I was an adolescent in revolt, I think, at that rate.
But I think that's the time that a lot could be
offered in the way of education of the emotional and spiritual side, which I think is completely neglected as far as education is concerned.
You say that in the essay as well, as a matter of fact, towards the very end.
I look back at that and realize that was 12 years ago, and I thought that then.
I didn't realize I thought that so long ago, but I've been trying to sell it ever since, but more so lately.
Do you recall offhand what years you attended Milton Academy?
Yes, I graduated from Milton in 1924.
And you were there how many years?
A year and a half.
So I was just there a year and a half.
Oh, you were just at Milton Academy for a year and a half.
But that made the biggest impression on me as part of my intellectual life has continued anything.
Do you think it was because of the excellence of the education, or the fact that they stimulated you, or the fact that you were a growing young woman, an emerging young woman at that point?
I have a great exponent in liberal education.
I went to Bates up in Maine, and I just think that education in the humanities and in life is the greatest thing that you can give to yourself.
This is why I'm exploring this a little bit.
I couldn't agree with you more.
Well, I think I discovered that I had some talent and recognized that I had been to a private day school in Lake Forest, which everybody went to with people in our circle of friends, my parents' circle of friends, and I think it was a pretty good education.
I think one of the best things I got there was an education in French, which I enjoyed from the very beginning.
Then I went to, as a day ago, to a high school, which really was not.
There were all kinds of people there, people that I would not, in the ordinary culture of men who ever met.
This is still in Illinois?
Excuse me?
Yes, in Lake Forest.
It's called Ferry Hall.
And it's now a junior college, I think, and very good.
And so my parents were occupied by themselves.
And I was the oldest child, and I was kind of a surprise, I think.
I'm looking every which way.
I was a surprise to them, and they depended on me along my time as time went on.
But when I got to Milton, I found that money wasn't as important as I had been led to believe that it was.
And I found that there were people that were serious about what they were thinking about and what they were talking about.
I think perhaps it was a stimulation as much as anything else because I have just put in touristy things about Milton into my essay that I just done the first draft of.
And in thinking what were my memories were, I'll tell you one that I didn't put in.
I find that everybody in my class at Milton was going to college.
I had no thought of going to college.
I wasn't entered anywhere.
So, because some of my friends were going to Vassar, I decided I wanted to go to Vassar.
Well, I couldn't get into Vassar because I hadn't had any Latin or Greek.
My father didn't believe in the classics.
He thought that there were dead languages, and that was not necessary.
But he did make sure that I learned to speak French, and I learned to speak French before I was seven years old.
And Vassar stood me in very good stead.
It means that when I suddenly, after I was grown up and married, and wanted to learn to speak Spanish, it's very easy for me to learn Spanish.
It's easy, the languages I love, and I can get on in Italian, and I can, my Spanish is not nearly as old as my friends, but I can manage all that.
So I've had fun with that.
Well, to go back to Milton Academy, in order to get into that, I had to have four years of Latin.
I had that month.
So the mathematics teacher, Mrs. Clausen, treated me twice a day for a year and a half, and I got into this Latin.
Four years of Latin, a year and a half.
And when I got to the Auburn virtual, I just loved it.
I was fascinated by a great fun.
And I did well in my writing at Milton.
I was on the board of the
school paper, which was beyond me.
I didn't really know what I was doing there or how to do it.
I think I was a drama critic, and there was precious little drama outside of my own life that I could criticize, and I didn't know how to do it.
The other great influence was my English teacher, who was Mr. Simpson, who taught in the boys' school.
And, of course, we didn't have any masters in the girls' school, only women teachers.
But Mr. Henson used to walk across the street in the two schools.
It's only become coeducational in the last few years.
And he used to come across and he taught what was the Honors English course.
And he was a real scholar and he was exciting and he was interesting and he was a tickler for accuracy.
And I remember dashing off of
piece of some kind, an assignment of some kind that had the word swimming in it, and I just wrote SW and a whole lot of those things and put a few dots on the top.
And he sat down and he said, just a minute, and in front of me he counted every one of those little peaks that I'd left in there, and then he marked my papers down a grade because there was one peak missing.
And so that probably something that I've never forgotten has got to be accurate.
And he was also great on memorizing things.
And I thought that was kind of a waste of time, honestly, from the frontier when I came from Chicago.
Well, I agree with that.
I think memorizing things is a fruitless exercise.
I would much rather understand them.
I've understood them through memorizing some of them.
But what happened was that we had to do at least one stanza of the old keep to go to Nightingale for one thing.
And I dilly-dallied over that and didn't get it done.
And he insisted in his quiet way.
And finally, I thought to hell with it, so I memorized the whole thing.
And it's eight stanzas.
And then I memorized a lot more.
And I use that today instead of counting sheep for all the pointers I know.
And I know a lot by heart.
So it's good.
So then you did spend a year and a half at Basser.
I spent a year and a half at Milton.
I'm sorry, but then how long at Basser?
One year.
One year at Basser.
Yes, because in between, I had gone to Europe with my family, and I lived in such a different world in Europe, and again, it was like living in a Victorian novel.
These are pre-Depression years, of course, as well.
Just, just the pre-Depression years.
But by an interesting set of circumstances, my father got to know a lot of people like Lord Birkenhead, who we knew well, and he was Chancellor of the Exchequer, and an extraordinary man, Winston Churchill, whom we met.
I didn't know him well, and a lot of the British aristocracy
And all this was very heady and very interesting.
But the life was the life of a guillotant.
I used to go to the races with a girlfriend that I knew liked to do that kind of thing.
We're talking about in England.
In England.
So when I got back to Vassar, I was spoiled, and I didn't like it at all.
I didn't like being cooped up with a lot of women, for one thing.
You're kind of feeling your oath a little bit.
Yes, I think so.
And also, again, a false set of values that I discovered eventually were not mine, and the seeds, I think, were laid at Milton.
So I left, and then I went to Columbia, and I took two courses, because we lived in New York.
At that time, we had moved from Chicago to New York.
This is about 1920?
When you went to Columbia?
30, 31.
Okay.
Yes, about in there.
So this is during the Depression, then, you studied at Columbia?
Yes, but it was before the full impact of the Depression hit my father.
And I took two courses, one in creative writing at Columbia, a lot at Barney, and one on 18th-century English poetry, I think it was.
And then my family wanted to go somewhere, so I left again.
That's all the education I have, except for, I think I have some loose credits around both at Clark and at Assumption College if I wanted to pick them up some by now and often thought, I'd really like to get a degree.
I'd like to get an earned degree.
But other things are more important to me.
Do you feel that that's kind of an omission in your life, that you didn't
complete the formal education?
Yes and no.
I feel, I don't feel uneducated, except that it's... I use the word formal.
Yes.
I've used that too.
No, it just would be tidier, I guess, I feel, if I had at least had a... Well, I'm kind of
flotting my way, I guess, towards the point in that it seems to me that you've basically considered your life, your education.
Yes, yes.
And I guess it goes back to my opening question, keeping an open mind, being alert to what's going on in life, and in your life particularly, and I guess deriving some wisdom from it, from all these various experiences.
I guess maybe that's what a liberal education is
I think perhaps it's the most important thing in a liberal education, and a lot of it came to me by... No, what is?
I'm sorry, what's the most important thing?
An open mind.
Curiosity and an open mind.
And respect for other people's opinions and other people's integrities, and disrespect of its offices.
I feel that I've had an absolutely fascinating life.
Because I'd been thinking back about it.
Wasn't you—now, you met Milton while you were at Columbia?
No, at Milton Academy.
Oh, you did?
But we—oh, the lad, he graduated a year ahead of me.
I see.
But we never knew each other.
So I didn't meet him until the Depression, when my father lost his third fortune.
And my sister and I went to work.
His third fortune?
Yes.
What was your father's?
He was a businessman.
He was, again, he was a man that should have had some direction and help in his life.
He was the youngest of six children, and my grandmother was quite a philanthropist.
And what was her name?
Her name was Lydia Avery Coonley Ward, and her husband died.
Coonley was my maiden name, and she married a man named Professor Ward, but she always kept Coonley, too, because she thought he was more distinguished than Professor Ward.
I'm not sure she was right, but that's what she thought.
And your father's name?
Prentice Coomer, his name was.
P-R-E-N-T-I-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-S-
And then his brother Howard, who was an ex-older one, worked for something called the Walworth Company that made plumbing fittings, you know, on a big scale of civic kind of size.
Sure.
And he persuaded my father to leave Chicago and move to New York and go into business with him.
And that was just before the Depression.
And then along came the Depression.
His Uncle Howard said he decided that there was only room for one person in the Walmart company at that level, and he was going to be it.
So my father was out of the job.
And he also helped a number of people and his friends had been doing the department.
And he was out of the job for quite a while, and then he became the first secretary of what was called in Washington
the Business Advisory Council, which is a liaison between government and business.
And he's not only the executive secretary of that organization, which is still in existence, it's now called the Business Council, but he was instrumental in doing a lot of mediating and negotiating between government and industry.
And he was quite a genius at it, and he used to have—he and my mother gave dinner for him at a lovely house in Washington, and they would get people to sit down at the table and talk, who would perhaps not have spoken to one another.
People in the government who were looked upon as sometimes as do-gooders, and people like Manning's head of Coca-Cola, and that kind of thing.
Then when the Second World War came along, he worked with Abel Herrmann, the NRA.
Oh, really?
I gather it was through these contacts that you went to England and met these people in the British government, if you mentioned, the Czech Republic.
No, it was through horses.
It was so strictly socially.
Well, I'll tell you what it was because it was an interesting story.
It's nothing you're going to want to... You never know.
But I was brought up on a horse.
We had horses and we rode and we hunted and my father played polo and that was the thing to do if you could afford to do it and not to be there.
My mother was a very good horsewoman.
She rode side saddle.
And so...
We were living in Lake Forest, and Lord Birkenhead was on a speaking tour, and a friend of my father's called and said, the one thing Lord Birkenhead wants to do when he is in Chicago is to have a chance to ride.
He loves to ride, and would you mount him, take him for a ride?
My father said yes, but he had a very good hunter, of whom we have a portrait, and a thoroughbred hunter, and he mounted Lord Birkenhead on that.
A whole lot of people went along with it.
Lord Birkenhead's daughter, Eleanor Smith, was with him.
And so Lord Birkenhead had a wonderful time, and he said, whichever you come to England, I would like to return this favor.
I wish you would look me up, and I'd like to mount you.
And so we went to, my father and mother, I was 18, I think, and we went to England.
And they took me with them, took me out of school, because this is off the record now.
Okay.
My father's mother... It doesn't matter if you won't let it go.
It's not something I want to publish, although it's... They took me to England, and we went first to Furnace.
This is my first trip to Europe.
And we were going from France to England and wondering what we were going to do.
And my mother said to my father, well, why don't you write your fancy friend Lloyd Burkenhead and take him up on that offer to Mount you and let's see what comes of it.
So my father did.
He didn't hear anything.
We went to England.
And we stayed at Brown's Hotel, as I remember.
for a night or two, and there was a letter from Lord Bersinhead saying, I have something better to offer you than just mounting you.
He said, would you like to see the Grand National Horse Race?
And I would like to take you, as my guest, to be guests of the Duke of Westminster.
And over the weekend, the Grand National Horse Race.
So that's what we did.
And then we were the only Americans there, and we were such curiosity.
We were asked back three times, and we went back three times, yes.
And it was just fascinating.
The Duke of Westminster was a complete charmer and quite a brilliant officer during the First World War, but also very much of a bill attack.
He's had a huge property called Eaton Hall outside of Liverpool.
There were 50 guests staying over at Grand National.
We went to the races every day in 15 Rolls Royces, and this was the whole scale that the thing was on.
And we made some very good plans.
And in this context that you met Churchill?
Yes, yes, because then Lloyd Burke had invited us to lunch one day, and the only other guest was Churchill.
Now, do I recollect that your dog's name is Winston?
Is that right?
Yes, exactly.
That's a hard time.
So that was pretty heavy, you know, and for a while I thought that I would marry an Englishman because then I could have a life that I thought I might be, might to accustom myself to.
When I was here last week with Sue Bowman, I think I had a note in that, a random note, and you said you would like to do a book on my mother.
Yes.
But in the meantime, I'm writing letters to the A, because I was cute.
Could you tell me your mother's name, of course, and explain to me why you might like to write a book?
My mother's name was Mary Bell Lord.
Two words, Mary Bell, or one word?
Two words.
Okay.
And she's very beautiful.
She was very neurotic.
She was uneducated.
She was sent to boarding school in Washington, yes, in Washington, from Chicago, when her father died.
Her mother died when she was two years old, and she was brought up by an aunt that she hated.
And she hated boarding school, and she left.
And she really had no education at all, but she had a lot of intuitive wisdom.
And she was quite a charming.
But if I ever wrote this book, I would call it the story of a failure.
Because to all intents and purposes, by the standards with which one's life is measured, perhaps she was a failure.
And I think by her own standards, she was in and out of various hospitals all her life.
She had nine major operations in the days when anesthetics weren't much good and they didn't know what they were operating for, and that just seemed to be the last straw.
And our life revolved around her illness, really.
But at the same time, that was not the essence of her, but she never found the essence of it.
Now, it's getting more... What we've learned, I think, in this life is that we're beginning to learn something about ourselves and something about other people and something about why we behave like human beings.
And we've gone down an awful number of byros and by lanes, I think.
And what I would have tried to do, if I'd ever written this, was to show the words of a life that to...
by the standard judge, it would have seemed to be the failure, which to me was not.
Do you think, when you say she was a failure, and this is your word, you clearly must have some sense of what her potential was?
She had a wonderful way to speak.
She was very intuitive about people.
She was very helpful about people.
I think that she would have had to live a whole lifetime.
She would almost have had to live the life that I live to get from where she started to where she began.
And as I had to do the same thing to get from where I started to where I'm ending up.
And it takes a lifetime to do that.
Do you think that Estrella was in some way mandated by the fact that she was almost a Victorian woman?
The role of women was, I mean, I don't mean to make this into a feminist kind of an issue, but it would seem to me that perhaps circumstance contributed to this.
Well, my father used to say that she had an Edwardian head and call us her old legs.
That's as good a description of her as I think it was.
No, she wasn't a feminist at all.
My grandmother was.
And my great-grandmother, whom I remember, was, she died when she was 97, and she believed in free silver.
And when my mother was first brought to my grandmother's house, my father first brought her home, she sat next to my great-grandmother.
Her name was Mrs. Avery.
And Mrs. Avery turned to her and said, My dear, what do you think of free silver?
Well, they hadn't any idea of what free shelter was.
And she thought a minute and she looked at me and she said, Mrs. Avery, I just don't know what, you can't tell me.
So she was this and that.
That's wonderful.
She was that kind of person.
Jumping ahead now to the, oh, one other quote that you said that I like.
You said that one accomplishment that you are
who have received a Clark Honorary Degree.
And perhaps you might expand a bit on that.
Why is that?
Well, because that's the highest honor that can be made to a person by a university.
And I'm certainly not qualified
intellectually for an honorary degree.
I am not an intellectual, and I am not an academic.
I'm certainly not quite a... But you're certainly a woman of extraordinary accomplishments.
Well, and then the citation was done by Rudy Noonemacher, and I'm very proud of that, because it's a wonderful citation.
And I think that, like Gaul, my life is divided in three parts, and the third part is class, and it's been a career and an eye-opener for me.
The first two parts, just for clarification, being your childhood and adolescence, and the second part being... No, I would begin with my marriage.
That's the first part.
Really?
So everything prior to that is prologue, in other words.
Yes.
and that's what I'm putting in my story from the Roman Academy.
That is an introduction, a long introduction.
And the first part is my life, my husband and my family.
The second part is my life with the Norton Company, and those two overlap, because I was so much a part of that, and the travels that we've made all over the world, made friends all over the world, found that the Norton Company seemed to
hire the best people in the narrowest sense of the word, not the most notorious or the most celebrated people, but the most substantial people in all their operations, wherever it was, whether it was in Montevideo or whether it was in Lima or whether it was in Bangkok or wherever.
So there are a few places on this globe that Milton and I have not been.
And I wondered,
what my function was going to be, it wasn't to just go along, to be there while he was working.
And the first trip that we made overseas was in 1950, 1949, when we went to South Africa on the second trip to Pan American Flea down there.
And it was 51 hours flying time from New York to Johannesburg.
And we've been nine times
in South Africa in the course of the business, which has been fascinating.
There's a woman there who was the wisest man who ran our plant when we built one there.
My husband went down to make the decision as to whether or not to build a plant in 1949, and then he ended up buying diamonds for the company from the Diamond Center.
But I wondered what I was going to do.
And gradually it evolved that I really needed to keep track of the people that we met.
I was entertained by the wives.
I got to know them.
I found out things through them that were helpful to him that I could pass on, such as when we were in India, that there was a group of women that Polly Cowan and I talked with, and he spent a day with them, and found that they were very unhappy.
as wives of the Indians who were working in the Norton Company, because there wasn't a school that was suitable for their children.
And they had to take a ferry and take their children for miles to go to a school, which taught the language, whether it was Urdu or Quart that they spoke, I don't know.
So we passed this on to our husbands, who then would take some action on it.
And that was one thing I did.
Another thing that I did was we traveled so much
South America that I learned to speak Spanish, and so that was helpful.
Milton's greatest recreation has always been fishing, and we've fished in great many places all over the world.
So we've had marvelous adventures in the places that we fished, notably in South America, where if I hadn't spoken Spanish, one of us hadn't, and I'm the one to do it, we would have missed a lot of things.
We've made friends in
Chile, particularly.
And so then I thought it was nice of itself that we sent flowers to thank people that have entertained us and all that kind of thing.
And along the way, I made some friends of a woman in South Africa, as I started to tell you, who still I consider one of my very best friends.
And we see each other because we get to this country marvelously.
So that was maybe the most exotic place that we went to.
And again, just because this was part two of your life.
This is part two of my life, yes.
And then part three is Clark.
But just because before we get to part three, you said you traveled virtually everywhere, I guess.
Yes.
We should point out that Martin Company had facilities.
19 or 20 countries, I think it was, or all of them?
Oh, I think at least.
At least.
I'd have to come to mind.
That's fine.
That's okay.
But it did, and of course, beyond the excitement of the travel, and it must have just continued, the liberal education aspect is the park, I guess.
But this certainly was an education of sorts for you, wasn't it?
Oh yes, it's remarkable.
That's the sun's bothering me.
Not at all.
These things, it's like the golden age of paraplegs that only lasted 50 years, and these only maybe lasted, you know, 15 or 20 or something like that.
But all that living was packed into those, I think, three.
let's then get to part three the Clark you point out in your essay that I don't know whether you came reluctantly to this which I guess you were invited to participate in the committee you said every one of which you resisted I guess every one of which you resisted I guess on the ground that perhaps you felt you weren't qualified but
I can't remember what I said in that, but I finally said one day that one of the Bob Hyde was somebody who was a detective.
I said it, but I went very closely with him.
Another one was David Murphy, who wore a number of hats.
But he was the one that was the staff man on the Goddard Library.
And it was his idea, it was his brainstorm that got the result of industry names
I don't know whether I said in that or not, but I didn't think I knew enough, but along the way, I finally said one day, I've been there about a year, and I said, I don't know enough to get a trustee.
And David Murphy said, would you like to go back to school?
Did I put that in the essay?
Yes, well, that was very illuminating.
That's something every trustee should have.
That was something that a man can't do, because he hasn't usually, if he's a staff or person who's going to do us some good as a trustee, he's got to have experience, and he probably has a job that he's been working at, and he hasn't got the time.
I had the time to do it, and that's how I did it.
Then I thought I got to know something about what I was going to do.
And I think you actually attended classes, you stayed in a class.
Yes, I did some of them.
I've done that right along, in various times.
credits there in taking a tariff.
So you actually attended classes for credit.
That's not a new standard.
No, I didn't.
Not at cards.
Can I put you some more classes?
No, thank you.
Help yourself, please.
I took a French course at Desumption College for credit by mistake, when my mother-in-law, who had been fairly lately widowed, and she spoke very good French and very academic.
And she was responsible for having me invited to the French Club, which I've enjoyed for a number of years in Worcester.
But she didn't have anything to do.
And I said to her, how would you like to take a course in some college?
And we'll, you know, I'll do it with you.
You know, I'll come and get you and take you a Tuesday's and Tuesday's night.
But she thought she'd like to do that.
So we went.
signed up for this course together, and we found that we signed up to audited, I thought, and we found that we hadn't signed up for credit.
So I said, well, why don't we take the exam?
Why don't we go to the exam?
We've had a good time.
We said, we can do the exam.
And I got a B plus, and she got an A minus, and I thought, that's great.
It's marvelous.
But she was urgent.
grammar and all that.
I can speak French just as fast as the French can speak it.
But I can't read it right.
I didn't spend the time on that.
I wanted to learn to speak it.
And I can understand them as all the practice they go to.
So the important thing is you went out and became, you immersed yourself in the daily life of the university.
Oh, yes, yes.
Then every trustee—well, I had to know how to read a balance sheet.
I'm not in the financial, not in it, but I was.
And you mentioned that you learned a lot about bricks, as well, from the composition of them.
Oh, yes, we did that, yes.
But every trustee works.
Every trustee is on three or four committees.
And so I was asked if I would head the committee to plan the library, find an architect, build the library.
And each time, partly because of Milton, I think, I took the job because I was talked into it by Bob Hyde.
But they kind of ran it for me.
It turned into a committee of about 20 people.
And I said to him, there's too big a committee for us, it's unmanageable.
He wanted to put somebody else on.
He wanted to put Fred Howe on him.
And I said, have I got a choice in this?
I don't want him.
And Bob talked me into that.
He said, if we can interest him in this, he might be willing to help us financially, which is always a big consideration, certainly.
A big consideration.
So then I thought, the next thing I thought was, what I should do is to go and get a job as the librarian's assistant.
until I learned what I'm talking about.
I couldn't do that.
I didn't have time to do that.
So I hung on as best I could, and I learned a great deal from Tiltdown.
I learned a great deal from Paul Clarkson, who was the first curator of special collections that Clark ever had.
He reviewed books to me.
Did he?
Yes.
And I took over the job at Book Ed.
He was an interesting man.
He was delightful.
Yes, he was delightful.
That was great fun.
Then I got very immersed in the building of the library.
We went to see 22, I think, lots of different objects, and we narrowed it down to eight or nine, and then to three or four, and we chose John Johansson because he'd never done a library before.
But we had the Librarian of Harvard
who you probably knew, as a consultant.
And he was just like a praying mantis.
He went over every book and every bookshelf and every inch.
And he was the one that really put together a showpiece that the library is, which is what we wanted, and a dramatic building that was workable.
And so that was a great promise.
And then the next thing as we went along, we got this really—one subcontractor, it was a terribly complicated building, had a nervous breakdown over it because it was impossible to do some of the things the architect wanted to do.
For instance, there's a—you go into the carols on the
fifth floor, the fourth floor, on the side that looks over the garden, there is an angle on the room below that goes down like this, and they couldn't pour the concrete on that unless they got it.
They were over and over and over in just the right sunlight exposure, just the right heat exposure, either it froze or it ran.
And it was a lot of that kind of thing.
The man who was the superintendent was a man named Ed Lucia.
And Ed had a reputation of being an alcoholic and being very foul-mouthed.
And I got the impression early on that I was being kept away from him.
So I made an appointment and I went over and introduced myself to him in the library.
We talked, and we got to be great friends.
He's a wonderful man.
L-U-C-I-E-I.
I don't know if he's still alive.
He used to talk about bringing up children.
So the apprehension of other people was unfounded, apparently.
Well, he probably cleaned up his back a bit, as far as I was concerned, and that's all right.
But he said to me one day, he said,
You know, Mr. Tiggins said, you from this roof is just fantastic.
You've never seen anything like it.
He said, someday, when it's a beautiful sunny day, he said, put on your pants.
I said, excuse me, he said, I'll be here, pardon me.
Just dress appropriately and I'll take you up on the roof.
And I said, well, that would be wonderful.
But how are we going to get there?
Well, we said, we can, there are stairs that we can use, but they didn't use the stairs.
They took everything up with a crane because they didn't want to.
run the risk of damaging the stairwells or the elevators until they got to the top.
And there was their four stories, and then there was the roof.
And it's a box of books, as you know, and with the services on the outside.
And from the fourth floor to the roof, there was a ladder that was at a 45-degree angle over four floors.
It opened right to the bottom.
And I am afraid to go up on the ladder.
I can't get up on the ladder three steps to look for a bird's nest and stuff like that.
But Ed Lucia said that was the way to get there, so I win.
And my blood runs cold when I think of it.
But I had to crawl up on that ladder, across that step, all alone.
And all the time I was admiring the view, I was thinking that I had to go down on it again, but I made it.
And I think I can go up on the ladder now.
But I wasn't...
I wasn't going to admit it to you.
I wasn't going to tell anything.
Now, you came to this, I guess, in 62, I believe it is?
62.
I guess about midlife, perhaps.
Was it?
Let's see how old I was.
I was born in 96, so... How old was I?
About 60?
50-something.
56, I guess.
Yeah, I guess that.
the creation of a library, I guess.
Oh, no.
And only— Your children were—you had other children with Mexican— Well, the youngest one was at Harvard.
And I talked it over with the children before I took this job.
But I didn't know how demanding it was going to be or how I'd get into it.
But I'd often say to Milton, well, you worked terribly hard at that basis.
I said, well, you'd be paying a psychiatrist before I was doing it.
Did you do it as a project, or did you do it as a project for yourself, or did you see it as a contribution to a university?
I saw things that needed to be done.
And I think one of the things that I've been working on for a number of years in my mind, and I'm still going to go to work on it, is what is leadership, and is it something that can be taught?
And I don't know that it can be, but the ingredients can be taught.
This is where my thinking is at the moment.
And I think one of the things is that if you, as leadership, you need to be able to see something that needs to be done.
The campus looked terrible.
And so I thought, well, what can I do about that?
And I got together a group of women, including the president's wife, and I said, every Thursday morning we're going to go out here and we're going to weed this place and trim the things until we get it.
Well, we're going to do it.
What did you say?
And we are going to do it as individuals.
Yes.
Will you do it?
So they said yes.
They were quite enthusiastic about it.
And there was one gardener who didn't know anything about gardening, and he would rather ride around on the tracks or anything.
So we went at this, and we did it bit by bit, piece by piece.
Then we needed some shrubs to enhance the looks of the campus.
We came and dug quite a lot of things off this place.
And we had a very good gardener here, our own gardener who helped things a lot with it.
And we transplanted things.
We found places where we'd go and buy things cheaply, like azaleas, that we could dig up ourselves and then come and dig the holes and put them in.
The faculty would come out and work with us.
Paul Clarkson used to come every Thursday and help in his noon hour.
And when whoever was there that was helping,
But it got to be noon, then I would go and get some sandwiches and some thing to drink, and we'd sit down and have a picnic.
So you set the example, and... But it was fun.
And one of the offshoots was that... So, pardon me, before you get to the offshoots, but what is the...
That needed to be done.
And you take the initiative to start it.
Who was going to do it, yes.
And you get down on your hands and knees and start digging the first hole, I guess.
Yes, if you like, yes.
Okay, and then the offshoot that you were just about to... The offshoot was a lot of the faculty, and Clark has a very independent faculty, very independent, I think more than most faculty.
and also a fairly loyal faculty.
Of course, it's very much changed in these years because there's a lot of younger people and a lot of the people that I worked with retired and died.
But there were troublemakers, as there always are.
And they'd come across the campus, and then they'd see me, and they'd stop and talk.
And I got to know them that way.
Once in a while, there's like Saul Cullen, for instance,
like to sit down and talk, and he'd have some complaints of one kind and another, or perhaps it was somebody else who was—don't call him as a brilliant man, but if he had ever become president of Clark University, it would have been a very different school.
And I didn't want that, and neither did the trustees.
So we had a few narrow weeks along the way.
But I had an opportunity to say to the faculty member, this is not the kind of thing you can discuss for the trustee, or you should be discussing the trustee.
This is the running of the university.
We are in an advisory capacity, and we cannot interfere with the day-to-day running of the university.
That is the president's responsibility.
And if you feel that way about this, you go and talk to the president about it.
And I would almost always tell the president about these conversations, editing them somewhat, because some of them were very critical of some of the presidents, really, very outspoken.
But I feel that I found that I could serve as a mediator of some of these things, and that was useful.
And I felt that actually, in some of these confrontations, I almost always ended up on the back of the side.
At what point, through your service on
the succession of committees and buildings starting to go up, did you start to feel a sense of satisfaction and a personal satisfaction in the conference?
I wonder, or was there just too much to do to feel that while it was in progress?
I'm looking for a personal reaction to a response, I guess.
I don't think I ever thought about it.
that way.
I think that it was about halfway through my, when we were close to the finishing of the library, I began to peel my oats a little bit and I began to have the courage to make some decisions that I felt I could, as I told Dave Murphy, I'm going to throw my weight around on this one.
They're not going to take down that tower and put up this water struck brick that they
The library is made up.
It's too expensive, and it's not important enough.
It grows ivy on it anyway.
But that's that.
I don't want to hear any more about it.
So we wouldn't even bring up some of those things.
It seems self-evident.
They wouldn't bring up some of those.
I suspect they knew your position, perhaps.
Well, we would discuss most of the things in the committee.
And we did that when we were looking for presidents.
six presidents and one acting president.
We knew a revolving doorless president, Clark.
We had eight—he had four presidents in the first 80 years, Clark's history, and eight presidents in four years.
Something like that.
Amazing.
Well, it is amazing.
All of them left for very different reasons.
It was fascinating.
Did you consider yourself—
Democratic in your dealings with the other members of the trustees?
Because you mentioned leadership earlier, and I think leadership suggests that somebody has to get out front and point the way.
No, well, I've never thought of it that way at all, and I still don't think about it.
I remember Bob Hyde... I mean, you weren't the Iron Lady, so to speak, were you?
Well, I don't think I made as many enemies as she has.
I might say that.
But I remember Bob Hyde saying to me one day,
You know, as your leadership in this university has been so strong that thus and so on, I thought, what is she talking about?
I've just been, you know, doing what needed to be done.
I don't think I ever thought about that, except when we began to look for presidents, I was determined that we weren't going to take a vote on anything if we could help it.
We were going to reach consensus every step of the way which we did, I think.
Well, I think that's another emolument of leadership, isn't it?
Yes, I think so.
I think so.
To lead people to consensus.
And I remember one of the faculty members that I was very fond of, Roy Anderson, saying to me one day, Alice, you were in that meeting, which was, I guess, a hot and heavy one.
He said, you didn't say much of anything.
You talked the least of anybody.
I said, I could see it was coming out the way I wanted to.
I think he wanted to come on us.
He said,
I didn't need to say anything.
I guess I asked a question about satisfaction.
You said you didn't have time to think about it.
I mean, because there were jobs to be done.
And did you see this as a—now, this was, again, the third phase of your life.
Was there a project that you felt that you needed now that the children are growing, your youngest child was in Harvard, you mentioned?
Well, I don't know.
It fell into my lap.
I don't know what I would—I would have had to do something otherwise, but I don't know what it would have been.
I didn't have any idea that I could take a job with a trustee.
So that was a lot of my advice.
And I think maybe it's true of most people.
It's serendipitous.
And I think that's what that was for me.
I do remember talking to a group of faculty one day about something.
One of them said, you're a terribly hard worker.
And Cy Watner said, yes, and she enjoys every minute of it.
And that's true.
That was true.
It's funny that you said, somebody reflected on one of the meetings where you hadn't said anything.
You said, well, I could see where it was going, and it was going in the right direction.
Interestingly enough, in your essay, you say one thing you have to learn is how to listen.
a lot harder to listen and to pay attention to what people are saying.
I think that's kind of a corollary to what you were just saying there.
Do you see a fourth phase of your life?
Probably, no.
I can't think of that.
I'm 87 years old.
Milton is 90.
All I'm trying to do is to see to it that I've yet him through the end of his life, really.
And it's not easy, some of it.
So I don't, I miss being on the campus, and I do keep in touch, and I do do some fundraising.
I want to go back to the library for a minute.
We've chosen architects, and then we've had, having gone through all that space of it,
And then we worked with the architect to build the library.
And then I was asked to head up the fundraising part of it.
And Milton said to me, that's something you're not going to do.
Somebody else can do that.
You don't know anything about fundraising, and you're not going to do it.
And so I came home, and I said, Milton, there isn't anybody else that's willing to do it.
I'm willing to do it, and I'm going to try and see what I can do.
Well, then I got hooked on fundraising.
I met some fascinating people.
And I think I may be closer to this.
I had some experience with it, with foundations, that the people of whom I was in awe, that it was so bizarre that I thought if I wrote these up for the New Yorker, if I could do that, I'd make more money for clocks than I'm getting them from the circuit, acting for it.
Incredible, just incredible what happened.
It was full of excitement and adventure.
So you enjoyed the fundraising?
You surprised yourself by enjoying this one.
Yes, yes.
I do enjoy it.
Apparently you learned some things about human nature, I guess.
A lot.
And then one thing that was fun about it was I found on the first one that I went and did by myself, without a staff person with me, was General Foods.
And they were an organization that didn't...